Update NEWS for cvc5 1.0. (#8460)
cvc5/cvc5: NEWS.md

This file contains a summary of important user-visible changes.

cvc5 1.0
=========

**New Features**

* *Streamlined C++ API*

* *Two new Python language bindings*
  - Base module: Feature complete with C++ API
  - Pythonic module: More pythonic bindings based on the base module

* *New Java language bindings*

* *Theory of Bags (Multisets)*
  - TODO: describe Bags

* *Theory of Sequences*
  - A new parametric theory of sequences whose syntax is compatible with the
    syntax for sequences used by Z3.

>   - A new array-inspired procedure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - A new array-inspired procedure (option `--seq-array`).
```

> * *Arithmetic*
>   - New nonlinear arithmetic solver based on cylindrical algebraic coverings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* *Arithmetic*
  - Nonlinear real arithmetic is now solved using a new solver based on cylindrical
    algebraic coverings. Includes full support for non-rational models and a number
    of options `--nl-cov-*` for, e.g., different projection operators, Lazard's
    lifting or variable elimination.
```

* *Arrays*
  - Added support for an `eqrange` predicate. `(eqrange a b i j)` is true
    if arrays `a` and `b` are equal on all indices within indices `i` and `j`.

* *Bit-vectors*
  - New bit-vector solver with CaDiCaL as default SAT back-end.
  - New approach for solving bit-vectors as integers

* *Datatypes*

>   - Updaters: TODO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Support for generic datatype updaters `((_ update s) t u)` which replaces the field specified by selector `s` of `t` by the value `u`. 
```

* *Integers*
  - Support for an integer operator `(_ iand n)` that returns the bitwise `and`
    of two integers, seen as integers modulo n.
  - Support for an integer operator `int.pow2`, used as `(int.pow2 x)` which
    represents 2 to the power of x.

* *Quantifiers*

>   - Get list of relevant Instantiations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: On second thought, our API is not ideal for this yet, let's not mention it.

  - Improved support for enumerative instantiation
  - SyGuS-based quantifier instantiation

* *Strings*

>   - Support for `str.indexof_re(s, r, n)`, which returns the index of the first

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Improved performance using new techniques, including model-based reductions, eager context-dependent simplification, and equality-based conflict finding.
  - Support for `str.indexof_re(s, r, n)`, which returns the index of the first
```

>   - Improved support for enumerative instantiation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Improved support for enumerative instantiation (option `--enum-inst`).
```

>   - SyGuS-based quantifier instantiation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - SyGuS-based quantifier instantiation (option `--sygus-inst`).
```

    assertions and provided goal (get-interpolant-next in SMT-LIB).

* *Pool-based Quantifier Instantiation*
  - declarePool declares symbol sets of terms called pools (declare-pool in
    SMT-LIB).
  - Pools can be used in annotations of quantified formulas for fine grained
    control over quantifier instantiations (:inst-pool, :inst-add-to-pool,
    :skolem-add-to-pool in SMT-LIB).

* Diagnostic Outputs
  - The option `-o TAG` can be used to enable a class of useful diagnostic
    information, such as the state of the input formula before and after
    pre-preprocessing, quantifier instantiations, literals learned
    during solving, among others. For SyGuS problems, it can be used to
    show candidate solutions and grammars that the solver has generated.

* *Unsat cores*
  - Production modes based on the new proof infrastructure
    (`--unsat-cores-mode=sat-proof`) and on the solving-under-assumption
    feature of Minisat (`--unsat-cores-mode=assumptions`). The mode based on
    SAT assumptions + preprocessing proofs is the new default.
  - Computing minimal unsat cores (option `--minimal-unsat-cores`).

* *Blocking Models*

>   - TODO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The API method `blockModels` can be used to block the current model based a mode (`block-model` in SMT-LIB).
  - The API method `blockModelValues` can be used to block the current model for a provided set of terms (`block-model-values` in SMT-LIB).
```

* *Model Cores*

>   - TODO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The API method `isModelCoreSymbol` can be used to query whether the value for a symbol was critical to whether the model satisfies the current set of assertions.
  - Models can be limited to show only model core symbols (option `--model-cores`).
```

* Removed support for the CVC language.
* SyGuS: Removed support for SyGuS-IF 1.0.
* Removed support for the (non-standard) `define` command.
* Removed Java and Python bindings for the legacy API.
* Interactive shell: the GPL-licensed Readline library has been replaced the
  BSD-licensed Editline. Compiling with `--best` now enables Editline, instead
  of Readline. Without selecting optional GPL components, Editline-enabled CVC4
  builds will be BSD licensed.

> * The semantics for division and remainder operators in the CVC language now
>   correspond to SMT-LIB 2.6 semantics (i.e. a division by zero or a zero
>   modulus results in a constant value, instead of an uninterpreted one). As a
>   result the option `--bv-div-zero-const` has been removed. Similarly, when no
>   language is set, the API semantics now correspond to the SMT-LIB 2.6
>   semantics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This file contains a summary of important user-visible changes.

cvc5 1.0
=========

**New Features**

* *Streamlined C++ API*

* *Two new Python language bindings*
  - Base module: Feature complete with C++ API
  - Pythonic module: More pythonic bindings based on the base module

* *New Java language bindings*

* *Theory of Bags (Multisets)*

>   - TODO: describe Bags

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  A new theory of bags which are sets that allow duplicates. It supports basic operators like union disjoint, union max, intersection, difference subtract, difference remove, duplicate removal, and multiplicity of an element in a bag. 
```

Reviewer: Reworded to "collections" to be generic (they are not sets).

This file contains a summary of important user-visible changes.

cvc5 1.0
=========

**System Description**
  * *cvc5: A Versatile and Industrial-Strength SMT Solver.*  
    Barbosa H., Barrett C., Brain M., Kremer G., Lachnitt H.,
    Mann M., Mohamed A., Mohamed M., Niemetz A., Nötzli A.,
    Ozdemir A., Preiner M., Reynolds A., Sheng Y., Tinelli C., and Zohar Y.,
    TACAS 2022.

**New Features**

> * *Streamlined C++ API*

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* *Streamlined C++ API*
  Please refer to the documentation for details.
```

* *Two new Python language bindings*
  - Base module: Feature complete with C++ API

>   - Pythonic module: More pythonic bindings based on the base module

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - Pythonic module: A pythonic wrapper around the base module
```

* *New Java language bindings*

* *Theory of Bags (Multisets)*
  A new theory of bags, which are collections that allow duplicates. It supports basic operators like union disjoint, union max, intersection, difference subtract, difference remove, duplicate removal, and multiplicity of an element in a bag. 

* *Theory of Sequences*
  - A new parametric theory of sequences whose syntax is compatible with the
    syntax for sequences used by Z3.
  - A new array-inspired procedure (option `--seq-array`).

* *Arithmetic*
  - Nonlinear real arithmetic is now solved using a new solver based on
    cylindrical algebraic coverings. Includes full support for non-rational
    models and a number of options `--nl-cov-*` for, e.g., different projection

>     operators, Lazard's lifting or variable elimination.

Reviewer 4: @nafur We should probably also mention the new optional dependencies.

> * *Arithmetic*
>   - Nonlinear real arithmetic is now solved using a new solver based on
>     cylindrical algebraic coverings. Includes full support for non-rational
>     models and a number of options `--nl-cov-*` for, e.g., different projection
>     operators, Lazard's lifting or variable elimination.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* *Arithmetic*
  - Nonlinear real arithmetic is now solved using a new solver based on
    cylindrical algebraic coverings. Includes full support for non-rational
    models and a number of options `--nl-cov-*` for, e.g., different projection
    operators, Lazard's lifting or variable elimination.
    The new solver requires the libpoly library, and Lazard's lifting
    additionally requires CoCoALib.
```

    if arrays `a` and `b` are equal on all indices within indices `i` and `j`.

* *Bit-vectors*
  - New bit-vector solver with CaDiCaL as default SAT back-end.
  - New approach for solving bit-vectors as integers

* *Datatypes*
  - Support for generic datatype updaters `((_ update s) t u)` which replaces
    the field specified by selector `s` of `t` by the value `u`.

* *Integers*
  - Support for an integer operator `(_ iand n)` that returns the bitwise `and`
    of two integers, seen as integers modulo n.
  - Support for an integer operator `int.pow2`, used as `(int.pow2 x)` which
    represents 2 to the power of x.

* *Quantifiers*
  - Improved support for enumerative instantiation (option `--enum-inst`).
  - SyGuS-based quantifier instantiation (option `--sygus-inst`).

* *Strings*
  - Improved performance using new techniques, including model-based
    reductions, eager context-dependent simplification, and equality-based
    conflict finding.
  - Support for `str.indexof_re(s, r, n)`, which returns the index of the first
    occurrence of a regular expression `r` in a string `s` after index `n` or
    -1 if `r` does not match a substring after `n`.

* *Proofs*

>   * When used after an unsatisfiable response to checkSat, getProof

Reviewer: @nafur I'm not sure how would be best to link to the general proof documentation here.  What should we put?

>   * When used after an unsatisfiable response to checkSat, getProof

Reviewer 2: We could use https://cvc5.github.io/docs/cvc5-1.0.0/proofs/proofs.html, being slightly optimistic that everything just works :-)

>   * When used after an unsatisfiable response to checkSat, getProof

Author: Added the link.

    (`--unsat-cores-mode=sat-proof`) and on the solving-under-assumption
    feature of Minisat (`--unsat-cores-mode=assumptions`). The mode based on
    SAT assumptions + preprocessing proofs is the new default.
  - Computing minimal unsat cores (option `--minimal-unsat-cores`).

* *Blocking Models*
  - The API method `blockModels` can be used to block the current model using various policies for how to exclude the values of terms (`block-model` in SMT-LIB).
  - The API method `blockModelValues` can be used to block the current model for a provided set of terms (`block-model-values` in SMT-LIB).

* *Model Cores*
  - The API method `isModelCoreSymbol` can be used to query whether the value for a symbol was critical to whether the model satisfies the current set of assertions.
  - Models can be limited to show only model core symbols (option `--model-cores`).

**Changes**

* CaDiCaL and SymFPU are now required dependencies.
* Options have been extensively refactored, please refer to the cvc5
  documentation for further information.
* Removed support for the CVC language.
* SyGuS: Removed support for SyGuS-IF 1.0.
* Removed support for the (non-standard) `define` command.

> * Removed Java and Python bindings for the legacy API.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Removed the legacy API along with the Java and Python bindings for it.
```

* Interactive shell: the GPL-licensed Readline library has been replaced the
  BSD-licensed Editline. Compiling with `--best` now enables Editline, instead
  of Readline. Without selecting optional GPL components, Editline-enabled CVC4
  builds will be BSD licensed.
* The `competition` build type includes the dependencies used for SMT-COMP by
  default. Note that this makes this build type produce GPL-licensed binaries.

> * Bit-vector operator bvxnor was previously mistakenly marked as

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Bit-vector operator `bvxnor` was previously mistakenly marked as
```

This file contains a summary of important user-visible changes.

cvc5 1.0
=========

**System Description**
  * *cvc5: A Versatile and Industrial-Strength SMT Solver.*  
    Barbosa H., Barrett C., Brain M., Kremer G., Lachnitt H.,
    Mann M., Mohamed A., Mohamed M., Niemetz A., Nötzli A.,
    Ozdemir A., Preiner M., Reynolds A., Sheng Y., Tinelli C., and Zohar Y.,
    TACAS 2022.

**New Features**

* *Streamlined C++ API*
  Please refer to the documentation for details.

* *Two new Python language bindings*
  - Base module: Feature complete with C++ API
  - Pythonic module: A pythonic wrapper around the base module

* *New Java language bindings*

* *Theory of Bags (Multisets)*

>   A new theory of bags, which are collections that allow duplicates. It supports basic operators like union disjoint, union max, intersection, difference subtract, difference remove, duplicate removal, and multiplicity of an element in a bag. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - A new theory of bags, which are collections that allow duplicates. It supports basic operators like union disjoint, union max, intersection, difference subtract, difference remove, duplicate removal, and multiplicity of an element in a bag. 
```

* SyGuS: Removed support for SyGuS-IF 1.0.
* Removed support for the (non-standard) `define` command.
* Removed the legacy API along with the Java and Python bindings for it.
* Interactive shell: the GPL-licensed Readline library has been replaced the
  BSD-licensed Editline. Compiling with `--best` now enables Editline, instead
  of Readline. Without selecting optional GPL components, Editline-enabled CVC4
  builds will be BSD licensed.
* The `competition` build type includes the dependencies used for SMT-COMP by
  default. Note that this makes this build type produce GPL-licensed binaries.
* Bit-vector operator `bvxnor` was previously mistakenly marked as
  left-assoicative in SMT-LIB. This has recently been corrected in SMT-LIB. We
  now restrict `bvxnor` to only allow two operands in order to avoid confusion
  about the semantics, since the behavior of n-ary operands to `bvxnor` is now
  undefined in SMT-LIB.
* SMT-LIB output for `get-model` command now conforms with the standard,
  and does *not* begin with the keyword `model`. The output
  is the same as before, only with this word removed from the beginning.
* Building with Python 2 is now deprecated.

> * Removed support for redundant logics `ALL_SUPPORTED` and `QF_ALL_SUPPORTED`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The SMT-LIB syntax for some extensions has been changed. Notably, set operators are now prefixed by `set.`. For example, `union` is now written `set.union`.
* Removed support for redundant logics `ALL_SUPPORTED` and `QF_ALL_SUPPORTED`,
```

* *New Java language bindings*

* *Theory of Bags (Multisets)*
  - A new theory of bags, which are collections that allow duplicates. It supports basic operators like union disjoint, union max, intersection, difference subtract, difference remove, duplicate removal, and multiplicity of an element in a bag. 

* *Theory of Sequences*
  - A new parametric theory of sequences whose syntax is compatible with the
    syntax for sequences used by Z3.
  - A new array-inspired procedure (option `--seq-array`).

* *Arithmetic*
  - Nonlinear real arithmetic is now solved using a new solver based on
    cylindrical algebraic coverings. Includes full support for non-rational
    models and a number of options `--nl-cov-*` for, e.g., different projection
    operators, Lazard's lifting or variable elimination.
    The new solver requires the libpoly library, and Lazard's lifting
    additionally requires CoCoALib.

* *Arrays*
  - Added support for an `eqrange` predicate. `(eqrange a b i j)` is true
    if arrays `a` and `b` are equal on all indices within indices `i` and `j`.

* *Bit-vectors*
  - New bit-vector solver with CaDiCaL as default SAT back-end.

>   - New approach for solving bit-vectors as integers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - New approach for solving bit-vectors as integers (option `--solve-bv-as-int`).
```

    the field specified by selector `s` of `t` by the value `u`.

* *Integers*
  - Support for an integer operator `(_ iand n)` that returns the bitwise `and`
    of two integers, seen as integers modulo n.
  - Support for an integer operator `int.pow2`, used as `(int.pow2 x)` which
    represents 2 to the power of x.

* *Quantifiers*
  - Improved support for enumerative instantiation (option `--enum-inst`).
  - SyGuS-based quantifier instantiation (option `--sygus-inst`).

* *Strings*
  - Improved performance using new techniques, including model-based
    reductions, eager context-dependent simplification, and equality-based
    conflict finding.
  - Support for `str.indexof_re(s, r, n)`, which returns the index of the first
    occurrence of a regular expression `r` in a string `s` after index `n` or
    -1 if `r` does not match a substring after `n`.

* *Proofs*
  * Documentation available at:
    https://cvc5.github.io/docs/cvc5-1.0.0/proofs/proofs.html
  * When used after an unsatisfiable response to checkSat, getProof
    returns a representation of the refutation proof for the current set of
    assertions (get-proof in SMT-LIB).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Preliminary support for translations to external proof formats LFSC and Alethe.

```

* *Difficulty Estimation*
  - The API method getDifficulty returns a map from asserted formulas to
    integers which estimates how much that formula contributed to the
    difficulty of the overall problem (get-difficulty in SMT-LIB).

* *Learned Literals*

>   - The API method  getLearnedLiterals gets a list of literals that are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The API method getLearnedLiterals gets a list of literals that are
```

  * The API method getAbduct can be used to find an abduct for the current set
    of assertions and provided goal (get-abduct in SMT-LIB). Optionally, a
    SyGuS grammar can be provided to restrict the shape of possible abducts.
    If using the text inferace, the grammar may be provided using the same
    syntax for grammars as in SyGuS IF format.
  * The API method getInterpolant can be used to find an interpolant for the
    current set of assertions and provided goal (get-interpolant in SMT-LIB).
    Like abduction, grammars may be provided to restrict the shape of
    interpolants.

* *Support for Incremental Synthesis Queries*
  - The core SyGuS solver now supports getting multiple solutions for a
    synthesis conjecture via the API. The method checkSynthNext finds the
    next SyGuS solution to the current set of SyGuS constraints
    (check-synth-next in SyGuS IF).
  - getAbductNext finds the next abduct for the current set of
    assertions and provided goal (get-abduct-next in SMT-LIB).
  - getInterpolantNext finds the next interpolant for the current set of
    assertions and provided goal (get-interpolant-next in SMT-LIB).

* *Pool-based Quantifier Instantiation*

>   - declarePool declares symbol sets of terms called pools (declare-pool in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The API method declarePool declares symbol sets of terms called pools (declare-pool in
```

* SyGuS: Removed support for SyGuS-IF 1.0.
* Removed support for the (non-standard) `define` command.
* Removed the legacy API along with the Java and Python bindings for it.
* Interactive shell: the GPL-licensed Readline library has been replaced the
  BSD-licensed Editline. Compiling with `--best` now enables Editline, instead
  of Readline. Without selecting optional GPL components, Editline-enabled CVC4
  builds will be BSD licensed.
* The `competition` build type includes the dependencies used for SMT-COMP by
  default. Note that this makes this build type produce GPL-licensed binaries.
* Bit-vector operator `bvxnor` was previously mistakenly marked as
  left-assoicative in SMT-LIB. This has recently been corrected in SMT-LIB. We
  now restrict `bvxnor` to only allow two operands in order to avoid confusion
  about the semantics, since the behavior of n-ary operands to `bvxnor` is now
  undefined in SMT-LIB.
* SMT-LIB output for `get-model` command now conforms with the standard,
  and does *not* begin with the keyword `model`. The output
  is the same as before, only with this word removed from the beginning.
* Building with Python 2 is now deprecated.

> * The SMT-LIB syntax for some extensions has been changed. Notably, set operators are now prefixed by `set.`. For example, `union` is now written `set.union`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The SMT-LIB syntax for some extensions has been changed. Notably, set operators are now prefixed by `set.`, and relations by `rel.`. For example, `union` is now written `set.union`.
```

    assertions and provided goal (get-interpolant-next in SMT-LIB).

* *Pool-based Quantifier Instantiation*
  - The API method declarePool declares symbol sets of terms called pools

>     (declare-pool in SMT-LIB).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    (`declare-pool` in SMT-LIB).
```
